#### I want to do that

I said out loud to no one in particular. I had just finished watching a [TED talk]() done by the Swedish Academic Hans Rosling on the topic global economic development. While the economics student and peace corps volunteer within me had come for his discussion on how much of the world has lifted itself from poverty in the past 100 years. A much humbler part of me was mesmerized by the data visualizations he utilized to make his case: our understanding of the world is severely handicapped by our inability to see the data behind it. 

In broad theatric strokes, Dr. Rosling motioned his hands upwards, as animated circles representing individual countries traveled up the x axis representing GDP per capita and the y axis measuring life expectancy. With nothing more than access to publicly available data downloaded from the UN and World Bank and a bit of code, Rosling and his team had created a tool that challenged preconceptions and stereotypes, not with crafty words or incomprehensible math but with simple graphs. The greatest change in quality of life in humanity's history, is happening in recent memory with Asia's explosive economic growth. The fastest growing economies are in sub-Saharan Africa. Education and healthcare can and does create enduring changes in communities. It was all there, at first stored in a database somewhere meticulously maintained by some UN agency, and now brought forth onto the web. Toward the end of the talk I realized that Dr. Rosling wasn't giving his talk to demonstrate his research but to call his audience to follow his example. Technology can enable us to gain a greater understanding of our world. But it was up to us to pick up the hammer and begin pounding.  

While I had been using a computer from a young age, perhaps the most technical things I had done by this point included customizing my myspace page back in the day and becoming a better than average excel user during the course of a few college internships. I hadn't studied computer science in college, and like many never saw anything beyond the external fixtures of technology: the screen, the mouse, the keyboard, the on and off button I would constantly mash hoping that by some miracle it would repair anything that ailed my computer or phone. But as I sat there in my modest apartment, I decided that given my situation at the time, I could try to make a graph like the one I saw in that TED talk. And perhaps illuminate some story buried within the data. I had always been fascinated by statistics, it had been my best subject in university and I had throughly enjoyed doing regression analysis for my economics papers. I knew that the statistical software I had used back at university would now be out of reach, so I googled "free alternative to Stata or SPSS", the programming language Python came up as a top result. 

I spent the rest of that night reading about what was being done with Python. Python along with R, was at the forefront of the burgeoning field of data science. A field whose aim matched what Dr. Rosling was calling for in his talk, extract value from the data. As I read more the more I got excited. Everything that Dr. Rosling had called for in his talk, seemed to be happening in data science. Elegant graphs demonstrating trends and stories hidden with copious amounts of data and AI models built from the predictive power of these trends. Right along with the web articles detailing the advances being made in data science were a multitude of tutorials. Also youtube, one can learn anything on youtube. 

As my browser tabs grew so did my first python scripts. Once I had finished loading and creating graphs and models with data provided by the tutorials I began to look for fresh data to explore. As I saw it, making a machine learning model on data that a tutorial provided while useful in a technical sense, was unispiring. The way I saw it, I wanted to explore unknown territory, gather previously unseen insights from data that hadn't been found yet. 

At the time I was a peace corps volunteer in Kosovo. The Peace Corps as of late has been working on updating the ways it measures its projects' performance and for us at the time it meant conducting one on one interviews with our students from our ESL programs and guaging their english ability. All this data was being manually gathered in large excel sheets and simply shipped back to washington where perhaps it made its way into some compiled report presented before congress. I saw this a wasted opportunity, we were the ones who were actually out in the field with the communities we worked in and I felt that we could benefit from the perspectives this data could bring. So after taking on the responsibility of overseeing data collection I began working on a [jupyter notebook
](https://jupyter.org/) that eventually grew into a 40 page report detailing the various determinates of student success in Kosovo, from broad trends to minute pecularities. I had charts, graphs, interactive tables, models and analysis. With each new technique I learned I added a new section to this notebook I was putting together. 

As time went on I began using the skills I had gained to work on other projects, namely employee feedback surveys and enrollment records for community programs. Invariably once the data had been transformed, conversations took place. From my analysis of the peace corps education program, we were able to identify that while boy typically dominated the top performance rung in academic acheivement, girls on average did much better and the lower performers were mostly male. We also found that living in a community with a large diaspora population enhanced english ability, more so than living in an urban area where schools were perceived to be better. From looking at employee feedback at one particular organization, we were able to identify a previously unacknowledged problem with tyrannical middle management that would have been hidden if all we had done was look at the average satisfaction rate. 

I continued to do these types of projects, and as I did more the more my work became a part of who I was. And like many people I liked to talk about myself, and so I began talking about data science with everyone who would listen. 
