# Everyone should program

Or well perhaps not everyone, just as not everyone should ride a bike, or drive a car, or browse the internet. Nor will everyone program even if they could, just as not everyone wants to read a book or figure out how to pay their taxes online. But in this day and age, we take it as given that most functioning adults should gain skills such as the ability to drive a car, be literate, or put together a powerpoint presentation. In a historical sense all of the above used to be exclusive domain of specialists, who were privileged to know such elusive arts such as the how to read the written word, operate a model-T or type on a typewriter. But as the utility of such skills grew in an economic sense, skills such as typing became an assumed skill and people, as they always have done, adapted.And as more people adapted the adaptation process for others became easier. What is a instructor but a shortcut to a new skill. As reading and writing became more important, society produced teachers to educate the masses. When cheap automible production was possible, not only did cars proliferate but also more easy to use features for using a car proliferated. Automatic transmission wasn't a thing until a gear system was invented. I don't think I need to convince you that in our time the computer is the technology that defines our era. Conceived of less than a century ago, the contraptions have made their way into almost every facet of our lives. And for the vast majority of us literally nothing in our lives have been left untouched by computers and it's single greatest byproduct: the internet. 

Most computer users interface with their machines as consumers. You open a program that was likely designed by a large company and you work within the confines of what this particular company has given you. Overtime if you are dilligent, you become aware of and master the outer limits of what is available with a program but that's where it stops. You're out of luck at that point, you either have to search for a new program or hope that said company will create the features you're hoping for. Learning the basic building blocks of computer programs, vastly expands what you can do with your machine. I'm not advocating that we all learn how to compile binary, what I hope to draw your attention to is that programming languages like python, javascript, and a host of others that are not cryptic languages that only a select few can comprehend but comprehensible and dynamic tools that are not out of the realms of most people's understanding. Very early, dare I saw, primitive languages were as incomprehensible as a moveable type printing press would be to a modern person. But today, modern programming languages like python, javascript, R, and many others are powerful yet comprehensible and I feel that no one has rung the bell to the general public, you too can take part in the revolution that is modern programming. 

# For the underemployed living in their parent's spare room
When deciding to create this blog I thought of people very much like myself. 20 somethngs without any clear path towards how to make a living in this post-modern world. To you all let me say, being literate and producitive in this brave new world the killer skill of the now is to program. In the end to build a great website or application requires no degree, no family inheritenance or any kind of permission. To create a website or application one needs only the willingness and patience to begin such an understaking. No exquisite degree or family connections necessary. The path forward in the grand sensce is purely meritocratic, especially in the open source world. If you happened upon my blog as a young person struggling to carve a place in this digitized world, know that I'm on your side. By learning the tools of this eara you are on the right side of history. You like your ancestors had to jump through hoops to make life workable, had to learn to skills of the era to make life work. If you're older than all I would say is that the saying "you can't teach an old dog new tricks" has likely never interacted with an old dog that happens to be hungry, they'll learn a new trick or two when needed. I'm pretty certain that most people could benefit from expanding their skillset to include some amount of programming. I personally learned to program for blogs and other free resources. This blog is nothing more than a homage to the people who put their exprience into content that I freely consumed. Even if this blog is an incomprehensible heap of text. I feel compeled to create if nothing else than to offer a humble homage to those who's material helped me get to where I am today. 

# Eat the elephant one meal at a time

A great journey begins with a single step. While in university, I briefly flitered with programming. A short trip through the google trail left me overwhelmed. The number of programming languages and the many facetes that they flowed through left me overwhelmed. Front end and backend languages, object oriented and scripting languages, vim vs emacs, the programming world is repleate with choices and paths to take that surely if one were to live a thousand years you could barely scratch the surface of what is available today in modern programming. But in the sea of altenate paths let me give you my take on some reasonable starting paths towards becoming a seasoned programmer. 

## Data Science
If you like me are interested in machine learning and finding the signal in the noise as Nate Silver would put it or you work in an industry that involves any kind of analytics, I'd start exploring the field of data science. While Python has by and large come out ahead of R in terms of people programming in it for data science. I'd choose between Python or R on the basis of where you're currently at in life. If you're looking to make programming your new bread and butter then I'd learn Python first. Python is designed to be a general purpose programming language and operates in the data science space mostly due to extensions being created for it in the form of downloadable packages or libraries as they're called. But there are a multitude of very well made libaries in Python for everything from web development to visualization, making it very flexible in terms of the kinds of tasks that can be performed in it. As the joke goes to write an essay with Python one simply has to run `import essay`. R in my experience seems to be favored by academics and is purpose built for data analytics and stats in general. R's syntax and feel is very different from other programming languages because of it's more narrow focus, which results in it being a bit more friendly out of the box. I personally have only dabbled with R but did find it enjoyable and intuitive. 

### getting started with Python
* Download the [Anaconda distribution](www.anaconda.org) which includes out of the box a particular version of python, a bunch of commonly used data science orient libraries, the conda command line tool, git, sypder a decent internal development environment, and best of all jupyter notebooks
* start exploring data with Jupyter: jupyter notebooks are an extension of ipython notebooks which unlike traditional code scripts can 

